This is the official homepage for the **election-methods mailing list**.

  - **[Subscribe to election-methods
    list](http://lists.electorama.com/listinfo.cgi/election-methods-electorama.com)**
  - **[election-methods list
    archives](http://lists.electorama.com/pipermail/election-methods-electorama.com/)**

On “election-methods-list”, we discuss the nitty-gritty details of
single-winner election reform, the relative merits of different
proportional representation systems, and the technical underpinnings of
all election methods. “election-methods-list” discussions tend to be
technical in nature (or at least, very laden with jargon), with the
ultimate goal of providing recommendations and educational material to
the electoral reform movement.

Those that want to have in-depth discussions about the technical
subtleties of election methods can use “election-methods-list” to
discuss those things without fear of reprisal from those who aren't
interested.

## Code of Conduct

Please come prepared to defend the statements that you make, and to
directly answer the questions that others ask of you. This list was set
up to increase communication between people interested in new forms of
election methodology, not as a sounding board for those who wish to
drown out opposing views with prolific repetition of statements already
made. When conflicts arise, please use this list to understand *fully*
why the other side feels the way they do by honest intellectual inquiry.
And when those who feel differently than you are trying to understand
why you feel the way you do, please answer as honestly and directly as
possible.

Hopefully this is all common sense, but sadly not common enough (hence
the reason for this message). In summary, please ask, answer, and be
humble.

## Index of Voting Methods

A list of voting methods is stored [here](Main_Index "wikilink").

## Frequently Asked Questions List

Most things discussed on this list should be documented on
[Electowiki](Main_Page "wikilink").

Additionally, there are a number of unofficial sources which define many
of the terms used on the list:

  - The Wikipedia project is working on [Wikipedia:WikiProject Voting
    Systems](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Voting_Systems)
  - Phil Hunt once maintained the [Voting Systems
    FAQ](http://www.vision25.demon.co.uk/pol/votefaq.txt), which he
    posted periodically to [the alt.politics.elections
    newsgroup](news:alt.politics.elections), among others. It hasn't
    been updated in quite a while, though.
  - Mike Ossipoff composed [an explanation of single winner
    methods](http://www.eskimo.com/~robla/cpr/single-winner.html).
  - The [Netscape Open Directory Project Voting Systems
    page](http://dmoz.org/Society/Politics/Campaigns_and_Elections/Voting_Systems/)
    has a pretty complete list of alternate voting systems.
    [Google](http://www.google.com) also carries Open Directory with
    page rankings (very cool feature), so you can see [the ranked
    version of the Voting Systems
    Category](http://directory.google.com/Top/Society/Politics/Campaigns_and_Elections/Voting_Systems/).
  - James Green-Armytage's [voting methods resource
    page](http://inside.bard.edu/~armytage/personal/voting/) provides a
    detailed methods survey as well as original proposals and argument
    essays.
  - Rob LeGrand's [ranked ballot voting
    methods](http://userfs.cec.wustl.edu/~rhl1/rbvote/) page describes
    and evaluates several ranked ballot methods, including a very wide
    variety of Condorcet completion methods.
  - [RangeVoting.org](http://rangevoting.org) has a lot of information
    both about range voting and about other voting methods.

## Email free subscription

If you really don't want to receive mail directly from the list, but
still want to post, you should still
[subscribe](http://lists.electorama.com/listinfo.cgi/election-methods-electorama.com),
but change your subscription by [visiting the subscription options
page](http://electorama.com/em/subscription-options.html). You will then
be given the option to “Disable Email Delivery”

## Archive

There are several archives available for this list:

  - [Electorama.com
    archive](http://lists.electorama.com/pipermail/election-methods-electorama.com/)
    - This is the official archive for this list, which has all postings
    back to the starting of the list in 1996.
  - The VA Linux Mail Archive service
    ([mail-archive.com](http://www.mail-archive.com)) carries everything
    back to 2000, [archived
    here](http://www.mail-archive.com/election-methods-list%40eskimo.com/).
    Messages from March 2003 and later [can be found
    here](http://www.mail-archive.com/election-methods-electorama.com%40lists.electorama.com/).
  - [GMane](http://gmane.org) maintains [a great archive of the
    election-methods
    list](http://news.gmane.org/gmane.politics.election-methods/). They
    have a great web interface, and additionally have an NNTP feed which
    can be read using standard [Usenet news reader
    software](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newsreader).

Additionally, [mail-archive.com](http://mail-archive.com) also carries
[an RDF/RSS feed of the mailing
list](http://www.mail-archive.com/election-methods-electorama.com%40lists.electorama.com/maillist.rdf),
used by syndication sites like My Netscape and [My
Userland](http://my.userland.com).

Speaking of [My Userland](http://my.userland.com), they now provide an
[election-methods-list
“channel”](http://my.userland.com/viewChannel$3894) which allows you
to read this list off of My Userland.

## Real-time Chat

An [experimental real-time, web-based
chat](http://electorama.com/2005/chat/) is available. It's not clear as
of this writing (2005-Aug-13) if anyone who frequents the mailing list
plans to use it, but it will be available for the forseeable future. See
also [election-methods chat](election-methods_chat "wikilink")

-----

*The election-methods list is maintained by [Rob
Lanphier](http://robla.net/).*

