Welcome to Electowiki\! This is a wiki associated with the
[Election-methods mailing
list](Election-methods_mailing_list "wikilink"), and communities of
election-minded people.

### Election Methods

There has been an increasing awareness in many parts of the world of the
effect that different [election
methods](:Category:Voting_systems "wikilink") (voting systems, voting
methods, etc; this site uses these words interchangeably) have on the
quality and timbre of elections and democracy. There are movements for
[proportional representation](proportional_representation "wikilink"),
[instant-runoff voting](instant-runoff_voting "wikilink"),
[Condorcet](Condorcet_method "wikilink"). This site gives you a guide to
what these things are.

But it also goes one step further: there is a vast literature on the
[theory](:Category:Voting_theory "wikilink") behind these systems: what
[criteria](:Category:Voting_system_criteria "wikilink") can you use to
judge whether a particular method works well? What
[strategies](tactical_voting "wikilink") will different systems
encourage voters to use? We record the collective wisdom of scholars and
enthusiasts, and, by working together, hope to create a canonical
reference for all to use.

### About the project

This is a wiki\! That means, anybody can get involved, building free
content. We offer a license for anybody to copy and modify our works. To
learn more about us or how to edit, see the [Community
Portal](Project:Community_Portal "wikilink") and [Frequently Asked
Questions](Project:FAQ "wikilink"). This project began in January 2005,
with article started on Wikipedia, but has since expanded to include
more detailed information about election methods that are still under
development that may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines.

### Electowidget

This site also hosts [Electowidget](Electowidget "wikilink"), a plugin
for MediaWiki for conducting online elections using advanced electoral
tallying methods.

**[See a list of all pages on Electowiki](Special:Allpages "wikilink")**

